In the previous video,
we talked about what an array is and how its structured.
In this video, we'll talk about declaring
and initialising arrays in Java,
and demonstrate some very simple manipulation techniques.
When you declare an array,
you define the type of the elements in the array.
The brackets, the left and right square brackets,
are the array identifier.
One set of brackets on the declaration side is required
to identify a one-dimensional array,
the brackets can be to the right of the declared type,
or the brackets can be to the right
of the declared variable name.
So adding brackets to both the right of the type
and the variable name is actually a legal declaration.
However, it declares a two-dimensional array,
not a one-dimensional array.
The type of an array can be any type,
a primitive, class, or an interface.
You never include the size of the array
on the declaration side, the left-hand side,
of a declaration initialization statement.
So here's some valid array declarations.
The first one int[] intArray;
and obviously the brackets are after the type there.
Brackets can be associated to the type,
indicating the variable is an array.
Next example short shortArray[];
this time the brackets are to the right of the variable name
brackets can be associated to the variable name,
indicating that the variable is an array.
Next example we've got int a, b[]
, c;
you can define multiple variables of a type on one line,
including arrays of that type.
Here we have a primitive data type variables a and c,
and an array of int stored in b.
Next we've got an int[] d, e and an [] f.
You can define multiple array variables
in a single declaration variable.
Note that variable f in this statement
is a declaration of a two-dimensional array,
not a single or not a one-dimensional array.
Next example we've got String[]
with left and right square brackets to the right
and then stringArray[];
left and right square brackets
to the right of the variable name.
This is valid, but might be unintended
because it declares a two-dimensional array.
All right, let's look at some invalid array declarations.
First, you've got int and then [2]
and then the variable intArray;.
Size isn't part of the declaration, this is a compile error.
Next we've got int intArray
then we've got our [] to the right of the variable name
with a number 2 in this case,
again size is not part of the declaration,
you'll get a compile error.
Third example int a , float b
[];.
You can't define multiple variables
of different types on the same line separated by commas.
This would be, also, an error.
All right, let's look at creating an array.
To create an array, you can use the new operator.
An example there, I've got,
int[] intArray = new int
[10];
and then a semicolon to end the line.
This creates an array of int with 10 elements
initialised to 0.
Next example, we've got a string array defined,
So, String[] stringArray = new String[10];.
This creates an array of String with 10 elements,
all elements initialised to null.
There's some notes here that,
even when creating an array of objects,
you are not calling the Object constructor,
so you are not using parentheses after the new statement.
You must define the size of the array, in brackets.
Once the size is defined,
you cannot change the size of an array.
And when you create an array this way,
the Java Virtual Machine automatically assigns defaults.
Those defaults are numeric primitives are set to 0.
Boolean primitives are set to false.
References, including primitive data type wrappers,
are set to null.
You can also use an array initializer.
An array initializer is a shortcut, that allows you
to create and initialise each element in an array,
in one statement.
And the examples we've got there,
we've gpt String[] stringArray =
then in curly braces we've got our elements
that we want to initialise,
I've got ;
with one, two, and three in double quotes,
and then null as a null type.
And that's perfectly valid, in this case it's creating
an array of String with four elements
all initialised with specific values.
The next example, int[] intArray =
and then the numbers, ;
That's creating an array of int with 10 elements,
all initialised with specific values.
And you can only use the array initializer,
in the same statement as the declaration.
All right, so let's look at some
valid array creation statements.
We've got int[] myIntArray = new int[50];
Here, the declaration with brackets is associated
to the type using the new operator.
And we've got a different example here,
short myShortArray[] = new short[20];
and again, the declaration with brackets is associated
to the variable name using the new operator.
Third example, int[] mySecondIntArray = null;
yes, you can set an array to null.
Next example, String[] myStringArray; on one line,
then on the next line, myStringArray = new String[12];.
So you can declare an array without initialization,
and then initialise using the new operator
in a separate statement.
All right, in this example,
int[] myIntArray, mySecondIntArray = new int
[50];.
So this is a valid statement,
but only the second statement is initialised here.
int[] mySecondIntArray,
myIntArray = mySecondIntArray = new int[50];.
This statement initialises both arrays.
Next example, which we've seen previously,
String[] myArray =
and then in curly braces,;.
This is an array of string with four elements
created with the array initializer.
String[] myArray =
and then, {};
this is setting the array
to a 0 length array.
Right, so this example I've got,
String[]
stringArray[] =
and then we've got two left curly braces, ,
separated by a comma.
And then we've got the same for }; .
So this is creating a two-dimensional array.
We'll discuss this a little bit later,
but just know that this is valid syntax.
Object o = new int
with [5]; .
Because arrays are ultimately objects,
this is valid initialization
of an array and assignment to an object.
int a[] = new int[]
and then we've got curly braces with ; .
You can combine the array initializer with the new operator,
as long as you don't state
the size of the array in the brackets.
Next example, int[]
then another []
matrix = new int[2]
and then the second []; .
This is a valid two-dimensional array
declaration and initialization.
Only the first dimension is required to have a size,
because you can have an array of arrays,
and the arrays referenced by the element indices
can be different sizes.
Now let's look at some invalid array creation statements.
First one, we've got
String[] stringArray = new String()[3]; .
The parentheses in this statement generate a compile error.
String[3] stringArray = new String[]; .
Size needs to be on the right side of the equation,
not the left.
int a[]
= int[]
and in curly braces,  ; .
An array initializer doesn't require
a restatement of the array.
int b[] = new int
[5]
; .
This is invalid because you're stating the size,
but the array initializer already defines the size.
String[] myArray; and then,
myArray = ; .
You can't use the array initializer
on a separate statement line from the declaration
of the array.
Next we've got, short[] MySecondShortArray, myShortArray =
mySecondShortArray = ; .
This isn't a valid statement.
Unlike using the new operator on the right-hand side
of this equation.
You can't use an array initializer in a compound statement.
The last two before we end the video,
we've got int
and two [][]
matrix = new int[] and then [2]; .
Only the first dimension in a 2-d array is required
to have a size, and this initialization
doesn't give it a size, so it is incorrect.
And lastly, int c[]
= new int[5]
and then []; .
So you can't initialise a two-dimensional array
and assign it to a one-dimensional array,
as we're trying to do here.
All right, so that's the end of the video here.
Then, in the next one we'll come back,
and start playing around with arrays in code.
See you in the next video.